feat(blog): Add new schema customization blog (#12146)
gatsbyjs/gatsby: docs/blog/2019-03-03-new-schema-customization/index.md

const Foo = SchemaComposer.TypeComposer.create(({
  name: "Foo",
  fields: () => ({
    id: {
      // types can be strings
      type: 'ID!'
    },
    bar: {
      // Allows referring to types by their string names
      type: 'Bar'
    },
  }),
})
```

The final schema pipeline that we implemented works like this:

1. We collect all types that are created with `createTypes` and add them to compose type registry (called _Schema Composer_).
2. We go through all the collected nodes and we infer types for them
3. We merge user defined types with inferred types and add them to the composer
4. We add default resolvers for type fields, such as for `File` and `Date` fields
5. `setFieldsOnNodeType` is called and those fields are added to the types.
6. We create derived input objects, such as filter and sort and then create pagination types such as Connections
7. Root level resolvers are created for all node types
8. `createResolvers` api is called and resulting resolvers are added to the schema
9. We generate the schema

You can see the TODO LINK `packages/gatsby/schema/` folder in the schema= refactoring branch to learn more about the code.

> 

Reviewer: Do we want to mention the `nodes` shortcut for `edges { node }` as "Bonus material"?

---
title: New schema customization API in Gatsby
date: 2019-03-03
author: Mikhail Novikov
tags: ["schema", "graphql"]
---

> Today we are releasing a preview of a new core Gatsby API - Schema Customization. It gives Gatsby user a much better control over the inferred schema, solving many common issues that people have with their data sources. In addition to adding the new API, we rewrote big chunks of schema generation code from scratch. This gives us a great long-term foundation that will let us make Gatsby GraphQL better in the future.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Today we are releasing a preview of a new core Gatsby API - Schema Customization. It gives Gatsby users much better control over the inferred schema, solving many common issues that people have had with their data sources. In addition to adding the new API, we rewrote big chunks of schema generation code from scratch. This gives us a great long-term foundation that will let us make Gatsby GraphQL better in the future.
```

> I would like to thank our community member [Stefan Probst](https://github.com/stefanprobst), who not only did lots of initial groundwork on the refactoring, but also helped immensely with the follow-up work there. We are really happy to have such a great community and super grateful to Stefan for all his hard work. I'd also like to thank [Pavev Chertogov](https://github.com/nodkz/), the author of the [graphql-compose](https://graphql-compose.github.io/) library that we used, who's been super responsive to our bug reports and feature requests.

Reviewer: Ha thanks for the flowers!

Reviewer 2: ![Thank You](https://media.giphy.com/media/nEMmyUp4hl1QOzovKh/giphy.gif)

> I would like to thank our community member [Stefan Probst](https://github.com/stefanprobst), who not only did lots of initial groundwork on the refactoring, but also helped immensely with the follow-up work there. We are really happy to have such a great community and super grateful to Stefan for all his hard work. I'd also like to thank [Pavev Chertogov](https://github.com/nodkz/), the author of the [graphql-compose](https://graphql-compose.github.io/) library that we used, who's been super responsive to our bug reports and feature requests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I would like to thank our community member [Stefan Probst](https://github.com/stefanprobst), who not only did lots of initial groundwork on the refactoring, but also helped immensely with the follow-up work there. We are really happy to have such a great community and super grateful to Stefan for all his hard work. I'd also like to thank [Pavel Chertorogov](https://github.com/nodkz/), the author of the [graphql-compose](https://graphql-compose.github.io/) library that we used, who's been super responsive to our bug reports and feature requests.
```

On the other hand, `createResolvers` is to add _additional functionality_ to types. `createResolvers` also allows adding new _root fields_ to Query type.

## `createTypes`

Let's consider an example with `gatsby-source-filesystem`, where we are loading data from `authors.json` file. It has the following contents:

```json
[
  {
    "name": "Mikhail Novikov",
    "birthday": "1987-09-25"
  }
]
```

This would be inferred in Gatsby as a Node type with a Date type for birthday.

```graphql
type AuthorsJson implements Node {
  # default gatsby node fields
  id: ID!
  parent: Node
  children: [Node!]!
  internal: `Internal`,
  # inferred fields
  name: String
  birthday: Date
}
```

However this can break if we accidentally add invalid date as a birthday for a new node.

```json
[
  {
    "name": "Mikhail Novikov",
    "birthday": "1987-09-25"
  },
  {
    "name": "Stefan Probst",
    "birthday": "Unknown"
  }
]
```

Now there is a type conflict between date and string and this will be inferred as string, possibly breaking our queries.

> ````graphql

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```graphql
type AuthorsJson implements Node {
  # default gatsby node fields
  id: ID!
  parent: Node
  children: [Node!]!

>   internal: `Internal`,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  internal: `Internal!`,
```

  # inferred fields
  name: String
  birthday: String
}
````

Luckily, now we can use `createTypes` action to force birthday to be a Date.

```js
exports.sourceNodes = ({ actions }) => {
  const { createTypes } = actions
  const typeDefs = `
    # One must say that the type is a Node
    type AuthorJson implements Node {
      # However Node fields are optional and you don't have to add them
      name: String
      birthday: Date
    }
  `
  createTypes(typeDefs)
}
```

Gatsby will now know that you want a Date and not override it with a string.

You can specify types for some or all of the fields that you have on the given node type. Gatsby will add missing fields. This behaviour can be controlled with `@infer` and `@dontInfer` directives.

```graphql
# For this type `name` won't be added

> @dontInfer()

Reviewer: I think type directives are not decorator-style but come after `implements Node`

Author: you are right.

type AuthorJson implements Node {
  birthday: Date
}

> # For this type `name` won't be added but birtday won't get a Gatsby resolver for date formatting

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# For this type `name` won't be added but `birthday` won't get a Gatsby resolver for date formatting
```

@dontInfer(noDefaultResolvers: true)
type AuthorJson implements Node {
  birthday: Date
}

> # For this type all fields `name`. Current default behaviour, but allows one to be explicit about it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# For this type both `name` and `birthday` fields will be added. Current default behaviour, but allows one to be explicit about it.
```

@infer()
type AuthorJson implements Node {
  id: ID!
}

> # Birthday will be Date, but we won't add a Gatsby resolver for date formatting

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# `birthday` will be Date, but we won't add a Gatsby resolver for date formatting
```

@infer(noDefaultResolvers: true)
type AuthorJson implements Node {
  id: ID!
}
```

## `createResolvers`

> This is a similar API to `setFieldsOnNodeType` in that it allows to add new fields and resolvers for them. However, this one is ran last, so you'd have all the schema available to you in it. Also it's possible to extend types like `Query` to add more root resolvers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is a similar API to `setFieldsOnGraphQLNodeType` in that it allows to add new fields and resolvers to types. However, this one is run last, so you'd have all the schema available to you in it. It is also possible to extend the `Query` type to add custom root resolvers, which enables a powerful resolver-based approach to querying your data sources.
```

Reviewer: Not sure how best to say this, but some stronger statement that we hope that the ability to define custom field resolvers enables new approaches how we can use Gatsby would be cool.

> This is a similar API to `setFieldsOnNodeType` in that it allows to add new fields and resolvers for them. However, this one is ran last, so you'd have all the schema available to you in it. Also it's possible to extend types like `Query` to add more root resolvers.

Reviewer: Might be also worth mentioning that we *do* allow modifying types from third-party schemas.

```js
exports.createResolvers = ({ createResolvers, schema }) => {
  createResolvers({
    AuthorJson: {
      // Modify birthday resolver so that it uses 1970-01-01 as default date
      birthday: {
        resolve(source, args, context, info) {
          // original resolver available as "info.originalResolver"
          if (Number.isNaN(new Date(source['birthday'])) {
            return info.originalResolver({
              ...source,
              birthday: '1970-01-01',
            }, args, context, info)
          } else {
            return info.originalResolver(source, args, context, info)
          }
        },
      },
    },
  })
}
```

It's also possible to create new root fields, for example one that will return all author names as strings.

```js
createResolvers({
  Query: {
    allAuthorFullNames: {
      type: `[String!]!`,
      resolve(source, args, context, info) {
        const authors = context.nodeModel.getAllNodes(
          {
            type: `AuthorJson`,
          },

>           { path: context.path }

Reviewer: Should we always add page dependency info in the examples?

        )
        return authors.map(author => author.name)
      },
    },
  },
})
```

> Notice the `context.nodeModel`. We expose our internal node storage to the resolvers, so that one can fetch data from there. Full documentation of nodeModel is available at TODO.

Reviewer: Maybe extra mention that we provide the full internal query capabilities on `context.nodeModel.runQuery`?

You can also see TODO ADD using resolvers example.

> # Why was it needed?

Reviewer 3: I think this section would work better if it was moved to just before the _New API_ section.

Thinking more... I wonder if this could be split into two blog posts? A first one that acts more as a 'quick start' introduction:

- What is this feature?
- Why should I be interested (what problems does it solve)?
- How do I get started?
- Quick next steps

And then a follow up that's a deeper dive into advanced examples and use-cases, how you built it, and what further work we want to do on it. What do you think?

Reviewer 3: That said - I really like the post you've got here, maybe splitting it up is unnecessary extra work.

Author: Let's keep it like that, I think we'll need advanced cases blog post later anyway, but I don't have many real advanced cases yet.

Author: I've changed the ordering a bit though.

> The motivation to do this change is a two-fold one. We've seen many issues with automatically generated schemas. They can change from a minor data source modification, like changing one fields. The resulting schema will break queries on the pages and will leave users confused. Making inference smarter is just pouring more oil on already burning fire, because the core issue is not the inferrence, but lack of control. Therefore we wanted to give people control over the schema.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The motivation to do this change is a two-fold one. We've seen many issues with automatically generated schemas. They can change from a minor data source modification, like changing one field. The resulting schema will break queries on the pages and will leave users confused. Making inference smarter is just pouring more oil on already burning fire, because the core issue is not the inference, but lack of control. Therefore we wanted to give people control over the schema.
```

> On the other hand, we wanted to reevaluate our approach to schema in general. In the "wild", GraphQL is used very differently than in Gatsby. Schemas aren't as commonly generated from the data sources and often schemas are the source of truth. We want to experiment with enabling people to use that approach with Gatsby too. By allowing people to define types and resolvers, we open new opportunities in that direction. We want to see how the community reacts to that and if that will evolve in some new approaches to defining schemas in Gatsby.

Reviewer: :+1:

# How did we do it?

> The biggest issue with building GraphQL schemas with `graphql-js` is that `graphql-js` expects all types to be final at the moment where either schema is created or one inspects the fields of the type. This is solved in graphql-js by using _thunks_, a non-argument functions that refer to types in some global context. With hand-written schemas it's usually type definitions in the same file as the newly defined type, but this isn't available in generated schema situation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The biggest issue with building GraphQL schemas with `graphql-js` is that `graphql-js` expects all types to be final at the moment where either schema is created or one inspects the fields of the type. This is solved in `graphql-js` by using _thunks_, non-argument functions that refer to types in some global context. With hand-written schemas it's usually type definitions in the same file as the newly defined type, but this isn't available in generated schema situation.
```

I would like to thank our community member [Stefan Probst](https://github.com/stefanprobst), who not only did lots of initial groundwork on the refactoring, but also helped immensely with the follow-up work there. We are really happy to have such a great community and super grateful to Stefan for all his hard work. I'd also like to thank [Pavel Chertorogov](https://github.com/nodkz/), the author of the [graphql-compose](https://graphql-compose.github.io/) library that we used, who's been super responsive to our bug reports and feature requests.

As it's a huge feature and big parts of the code are affected, we are releasing it as an alpha preview. You can try it by adding `gatsby@2.1.20-alpha.0` as a dependency for your Gatsby site. We would really like your help in finding out potential bugs in this code, so we encourage you to try it and report any issues that you encounter in [this pinned issue](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby/issues/12272). If you want to contribute to fixing some of those bugs, open PRs against [this branch](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby/pull/11480).

# Why was it needed?

> The motivation to do this change is a two-fold one. We've seen many issues with automatically generated schemas. They can change from a minor data source modification, like changing one field. The resulting schema will break queries on the pages and will leave users confused. Making inference smarter is just pouring more oil on already burning fire, because the core issue is not the inference, but lack of control. Therefore we wanted to give people control over the schema.

Reviewer 3: What do you think about adding a paragraph before this to explain how things currently work? I took a go at adding a new paragraph, and updating the existing paragraph, and ended up with:

>The motivation to do this change is a two-fold one. Before this feature, Gatsby automatically generated a GraphQL schema for your site based on the data available from your source plugins. While this schema inference is great for getting started it has also been the cause of many problems.
>
>Automatically generating schemas mean that changing your data can result in a changed schema. An updated schema may no longer work with the queries you've written, resulting in errors and confusion. Making schema generation smarter is just pouring more oil on an already burning fire, because the core issue is not the inference, but lack of control. Therefore we wanted to give people control over the schema.
>
>On the other hand, we wanted to reevaluate our approach to schemas in general. In the "wild", GraphQL is used very differently than in Gatsby. Schemas aren't as commonly generated from the data sources and often schemas are the source of truth. We want to experiment with enabling people to use that approach with Gatsby too. By allowing people to define types and resolvers, we open new opportunities in that direction. We want to see how the community reacts to that and if that will evolve into new approaches to defining schemas in Gatsby.

Author: Thanks!

      birthday: {
        resolve(source, args, context, info) {
          // original resolver available as "info.originalResolver"
          if (Number.isNaN(new Date(source['birthday'])) {
            return info.originalResolver({
              ...source,
              birthday: '1970-01-01',
            }, args, context, info)
          } else {
            return info.originalResolver(source, args, context, info)
          }
        },
      },
    },
  })
}
```

It's also possible to create new root fields, for example one that will return all author names as strings.

```js
createResolvers({
  Query: {
    allAuthorFullNames: {
      type: `[String!]!`,
      resolve(source, args, context, info) {
        const authors = context.nodeModel.getAllNodes({
          type: `AuthorJson`,
        })
        return authors.map(author => author.name)
      },
    },
  },
})
```

Notice the `context.nodeModel`. We expose our internal node storage to the resolvers, so that one can fetch data from there. In addition to lower level access functions (`getNodeById`, `getAllNodes`), full node querying is available in `runQuery`.

> You can also see the `using-type-definitions` example in the Gatsby repository.

Reviewer 3: Add a link here?

---
title: New schema customization API in Gatsby
date: 2019-03-03
author: Mikhail Novikov
tags: ["schema", "graphql"]
---

Today we are releasing a preview of a new core Gatsby API - Schema Customization. It gives Gatsby users much better control over the inferred schema, solving many common issues that people have had with their data sources. In addition to adding the new API, we rewrote big chunks of schema generation code from scratch. This gives us a great long-term foundation that will let us make Gatsby GraphQL better in the future.

I would like to thank our community member [Stefan Probst](https://github.com/stefanprobst), who not only did lots of initial groundwork on the refactoring, but also helped immensely with the follow-up work there. We are really happy to have such a great community and super grateful to Stefan for all his hard work. I'd also like to thank [Pavel Chertorogov](https://github.com/nodkz/), the author of the [graphql-compose](https://graphql-compose.github.io/) library that we used, who's been super responsive to our bug reports and feature requests.

> As it's a huge feature and big parts of the code are affected, we are releasing it as an alpha preview. You can install it through TODO INSTRUCTIONS. We would really like your help in finding out potential bugs in this code, so we encourage you to try it and report any issues that you encounter in this [this pinned issue](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby/issues/12272).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As it's a huge feature and big parts of the code are affected, we are releasing it as an alpha preview. You can install it through TODO INSTRUCTIONS. We would really like your help in finding out potential bugs in this code, so we encourage you to try it and report any issues that you encounter in [this pinned issue](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby/issues/12272).
```

# Why was it needed?

The motivation to do this change is a two-fold one. We've seen many issues with automatically generated schemas. They can change from a minor data source modification, like changing one field. The resulting schema will break queries on the pages and will leave users confused. Making inference smarter is just pouring more oil on already burning fire, because the core issue is not the inference, but lack of control. Therefore we wanted to give people control over the schema.

On the other hand, we wanted to reevaluate our approach to schema in general. In the "wild", GraphQL is used very differently than in Gatsby. Schemas aren't as commonly generated from the data sources and often schemas are the source of truth. We want to experiment with enabling people to use that approach with Gatsby too. By allowing people to define types and resolvers, we open new opportunities in that direction. We want to see how the community reacts to that and if that will evolve in some new approaches to defining schemas in Gatsby.

# New API

There are two main additions to the API:

> 1. `createTypes` action, which allows one to add, extend or fix the types by passing their type definition using TODO LINK graphql SDL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. `createTypes` action, which allows one to add, extend or fix the types by passing their type definition using [graphql SDL](https://graphql.org/learn/).
```

Reviewer: Is there a better link (other than the spec itself)?

Author: Added link to schema definition, dunno if it's the best.

```js
exports.createResolvers = ({ createResolvers, schema }) => {
  createResolvers({
    AuthorJson: {
      // Modify birthday resolver so that it uses 1970-01-01 as default date
      birthday: {
        resolve(source, args, context, info) {
          // original resolver available as "info.originalResolver"
          if (Number.isNaN(new Date(source['birthday'])) {
            return info.originalResolver({
              ...source,
              birthday: '1970-01-01',
            }, args, context, info)
          } else {
            return info.originalResolver(source, args, context, info)
          }
        },
      },
    },
  })
}
```

It's also possible to create new root fields, for example one that will return all author names as strings.

```js
createResolvers({
  Query: {
    allAuthorFullNames: {
      type: `[String!]!`,
      resolve(source, args, context, info) {
        const authors = context.nodeModel.getAllNodes(
          {
            type: `AuthorJson`,
          },

>           { path: context.path }

Reviewer: We can remove the page dependency info now.

        )
        return authors.map(author => author.name)
      },
    },
  },
})
```

> Notice the `context.nodeModel`. We expose our internal node storage to the resolvers, so that one can fetch data from there. In addition to lower lever access functions (`getNode`, `getAllNodes`), full node querying is available in `runQuery` .Full documentation of nodeModel is available at TODO.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Notice the `context.nodeModel`. We expose our internal node storage to the resolvers, so that one can fetch data from there. In addition to lower lever access functions (`getNodeById`, `getAllNodes`), full node querying is available in `runQuery`. Full documentation of `nodeModel` is available at TODO.
```

Reviewer: What would be a good place to document NodeModel? I could work on that.

Author: Maybe create a new page in docs, somewhere in GraphQL section. Link to it from createTypes/createResolvers actions.

> You can also see TODO ADD using resolvers example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also see [using-type-definitions](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby/tree/master/examples/using-type-definitions/) example.
```

Author: The master doesn't have it, because it's only in schema refactoring.

Author: Fixed.
